[DOC-2232] Doc for RBAC: Fine-grained query privilege: Query privilege migration and changes on built-in roles; (#482)
tigergraph/server-docs: modules/user-access/pages/query-privilege-migration.adoc

= Query Privilege Migration

> This page explains the procedures for the query privilege migration with an eligible version to upgrade from to 4.1.0.

Reviewer: Not very clear. "from to"?

This page provides detailed procedures for migrating query privileges when upgrading to version 4.1.0. It also outlines the specific privileges required to successfully carry out the migration process.

> This page provides detailed procedures for migrating query privileges when upgrading to version 4.1.0. It also outlines the specific privileges required to successfully carry out the migration process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page provides detailed procedures for migrating query privileges when upgrading to TigerGraph 4.1 from 3.x.
It also outlines the specific privileges required to successfully carry out the migration process.
```

To see user management tasks under the xref:access-control-model.adoc#_access_control_lists[Access Control List (ACL)] model, see xref:acl-management.adoc[].

To see Role-based Access Control(RBAC) Object-Based privileges, see xref:rbac-row-policy/rbac-row-policy.adoc#_object_based_privileges[].

== Migrate ACL Privileges

> Since 4.1.0, Access Control Lists (ACLs) should be deprecated.

Reviewer: This ia better: Starting with version 4.1.0, Access Control Lists (ACLs) are deprecated.

> Starting with version 4.1.0, Access Control Lists (ACLs) are deprecated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with TigerGraph 4.1.0, Access Control Lists (ACLs) are deprecated.
```

Query ACL privileges should be migrated automatically during upgrade. 

> [#_migrate_query_acl_owner]

Reviewer: Is it true that to initiate this migration, the user must have WRITE_USER and OWNERSHIP privileges on the relevant queries?

If yes, explicitly mention it.

Author: It is not necessary. It's an internal process when GSQL is starting after the upgrade.

=== Migrate Query ACL Owner

> The query ACL owner should be granted `OWNERSHIP` privilege on the query owned by this user/role after upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query ACL owner will be granted `OWNERSHIP` privilege on the query owned by this user/role after upgrade.
```

Reviewer 2: @jue-yuan @arun-TG-PM 
Word meanings: proper use of "should" vs "will":

- will - definitely is going to happen
- should - it is expected or desired (which implies some uncertainty). We don't want to use "should" when talking about the behavior of the product. It is appropriate when telling the user what they need to do to use the product properly, e.g. "You should change the default `tigergraph` password."

[#_migrate_query_acl_reader]
=== Migrate Query ACL Reader

> The query ACL readers should be granted `READ` privilege on the same query after upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query ACL readers will be granted `READ` privilege on the same query after upgrade.
```

[#_migrate_query_acl_executor]
=== Migrate Query ACL Executor

> The query ACL executors should be granted `EXECUTE` privilege on the same query after upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query ACL executors will be granted `EXECUTE` privilege on the same query after upgrade.
```

[NOTE]
====

> In some cases, query ACL privileges can't be migrated successfully, the owner of queries should become the user who operates the upgrade procedure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some cases, query ACL privileges can't be migrated successfully.
Then the owner of queries will become the user who operates the upgrade procedure.
```

> If all ACL query privileges are necessary to be kept, we recommend that you contact TigerGraph Support for the best way to restore consistency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contact TigerGraph Support if you need help retaining ACL-like privileges after upgrading from version 3.x to 4.x.
```

====

== Migrate Role-based Access Control(RBAC) Object-Based Query Privileges

> Since 4.1.0, Query Object-Based privileges are introduced. `CREATE` privilege on queries should exist on the global and local graph scope. Other query privileges, including `READ`, `UPDATE`, `DROP`, `INSTALL`, `EXECUTE` and `OWNERSHIP`, should only exist on the query scope.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query Object-Based privileges are introduced in TigerGraph 4.1.
`CREATE` privilege on queries will exist only at the global and local graph scope.
Other query privileges, including `READ`, `UPDATE`, `DROP`, `INSTALL`, `EXECUTE` and `OWNERSHIP`, will exist only at the query scope.
```

> All existing Query privileges should be migrated into Query Object-Based privileges during upgrade and fully backwards-compatible with existing queries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All existing Query privileges will be migrated into Query Object-Based privileges during upgrade and be fully backwards-compatible with existing queries.
```

[#_changes_for_builtin_roles]
=== Changes for Built-in roles
`READ_QUERY` and `WRITE_QUERY` privileges should be removed from all built-in roles.
The roles held `WRITE_QUERY` privilege before 4.1.0 should hold `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in the same scope since 4.1.0.
`superuser` should be the owner of all queries.

> `admin` in one graph should be the owner of all queries in a local graph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`READ_QUERY` and `WRITE_QUERY` privileges will be removed from all built-in roles.
The roles held `WRITE_QUERY` privilege before 4.1.0 will hold `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in the same scope since 4.1.0.
`superuser` will be the owner of all queries.
`admin` in one graph will be the owner of all queries in a local graph.
```

| `CREATE_QUERY`

| `designer`
| Local
| `WRITE_QUERY`
| `CREATE_QUERY`

| `admin`
| Local
| `WRITE_QUERY`
| `CREATE_QUERY`,
`OWNERSHIP` on ALL QUERIES

| `globaldesigner`
| Global
| `WRITE_QUERY`
| `CREATE_QUERY`

| `superuser`
| Global
| `WRITE_QUERY`
| `CREATE_QUERY`,
`OWNERSHIP` on ALL QUERIES
|===

[#_migrate_rbac_read_query]
=== Migrate RBAC READ_QUERY privilege
`READ_QUERY` privilege should be migrated to `READ_QUERY` privilege on the query object level for all existing queries since we should only keep query-level `READ_QUERY` privilege for all queries.

This migration process should be different for our existing `READ_QUERY` privileges when your users are granted with built-in roles or user-defined roles.

==== Migrate RBAC READ_QUERY privilege for Built-in roles
The `READ_QUERY` privilege in global and graph level scopes for built-in roles should not be kept since 4.1.0. For the detailed changes of built-in roles, please refer to the table above.

If users were granted built-in roles with `READ_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the `READ_QUERY` privileges should be granted to the users directly with all existing queries in the same scope.

====
.For example:

> * User `Alice` is granted with the built-in role `observer` in graph `recommend` in 3.10.0, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade process for 4.1.0, user `Alice` should have the `READ_QUERY` privileges on queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`READ_QUERY` privilege will be migrated to `READ_QUERY` privilege on the query object level for all existing queries since we only keep query-level `READ_QUERY` privilege for all queries.

This migration process may be different for existing `READ_QUERY` privileges granted to built-in roles vs. user-defined roles.

==== Migrate RBAC READ_QUERY privilege for Built-in roles
The `READ_QUERY` privilege in global and graph level scopes for built-in roles is deprecated in TigerGraph 4.1. For the detailed changes of built-in roles, please refer to the table above.

If users were granted built-in roles with `READ_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the `READ_QUERY` privileges will be granted to the users directly with all existing queries in the same scope.

====
.For example:
* User `Alice` is granted with the built-in role `observer` in graph `recommend` in TigerGraph 3.10, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade to TigerGraph 4.1, user `Alice` will have the `READ_QUERY` privileges on queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`.
```

====

> ==== Migrate RBAC READ_QUERY privilege for User-Defined roles
> If users were granted user-defined roles with `READ_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the `READ_QUERY` privileges should be granted to the same role with all existing queries in the same scope.
> 
> ====
> .For example:
> * User `Bob` is granted with the user-defined role `myRole` with `READ_QUERY` in graph `recommend` in 3.10.0, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade process for 4.1.0, role `myRole` should have the `READ_QUERY` privileges on query `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. User `Bob` can still read queries `query1` and `query2` since he is still granted with role `myRole`.
> ====
> 
> [#_migrate_rbac_write_query]
> === Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege
> In our previous versions, `WRITE_QUERY` privilege means we make all changes for a query. Hence, `WRITE_QUERY` privilege should be migrated to all privileges except `OWNERSHIP` for all existing queries, including `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` on each query object and `CREATE_QUERY` on the same scope for `WRITE_QUERY` privilege.
> 
> Similarly, this migration process should be different for our existing `WRITE_QUERY` privileges when your users are granted with built-in roles or user-defined roles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Migrate RBAC READ_QUERY privilege for User-Defined roles
If users were granted user-defined roles with `READ_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the `READ_QUERY` privileges will be granted to the same role with all existing queries in the same scope.

====
.For example:
* User `Bob` was granted the user-defined role `myRole` with `READ_QUERY` privilege in graph `recommend` in TigerGraph 3.10, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade to TigerGraph 4.1, role `myRole` will have the `READ_QUERY` privileges on query `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. User `Bob` can still read queries `query1` and `query2` since he is still granted the role `myRole`.
====

[#_migrate_rbac_write_query]
=== Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege
Prior to TigerGraph 4.1, `WRITE_QUERY` privilege permited making any type of change to a query. Hence, `WRITE_QUERY` privilege will be migrated to all privileges except `OWNERSHIP` for all existing queries, including `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` on each query object and `CREATE_QUERY` on the same scope for `WRITE_QUERY` privilege.

Similarly, this migration process differs for `WRITE_QUERY` privileges when users are granted built-in roles vs. user-defined roles.
```

> ==== Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege for Built-in roles
> The `WRITE_QUERY` privilege for built-in roles should not be kept since 4.1.0. For the detailed changes of built-in roles, please refer to the table above.
> 
> If users were granted built-in roles with `WRITE_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, following privileges, `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY`, should be granted to the users directly with all existing queries in the same scope.
> 
> ====
> .For example:
> * User `Alice` is granted with the built-in role `designer` in graph `recommend` in 3.10.0, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade process for 4.1.0, user `Alice` should hold the `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` privileges on queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. At the same time, user `Alice` can still create queries in graph `recommend` since she still holds the role `designer` in graph `recommend`, which provide the `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in graph `recommend`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege for Built-in roles
The `WRITE_QUERY` privilege is deprecated in TigerGraph 4.1. For the detailed changes of built-in roles, please refer to the table above.

If users were granted built-in roles with `WRITE_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the following privileges, `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY`, will be granted to the users directly with all existing queries in the same scope.

====
.For example:
* User `Alice` was granted the built-in role `designer` in graph `recommend` in TigerGraph 3.10, and there are two queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade to TigerGraph 4.1, user `Alice` will hold the `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` privileges on queries `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. At the same time, user `Alice` can still create queries in graph `recommend` since she still holds the role `designer` in graph `recommend`, which provides the `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in graph `recommend`.
```

====

> ==== Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege for User-Defined roles
> The `WRITE_QUERY` privilege in global and graph level scopes for user-defined roles should not be kept since 4.1.0.
> 
> If users were granted user-defined roles with `WRITE_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, following privileges, `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY`, should be granted to the same role with all existing queries in the same scope. At the same time, `CREATE_QUERY` privilege on the same scope should be granted to the same role in the same scope.
> 
> ====
> .For example:
> * User `Bob` is granted with the user-defined role `myRole` with `WRITE_QUERY` in graph `recommend` in 3.10.0, and there are two queries, `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade process for 4.1.0, role `myRole` should have the `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in graph `recommend`, and `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` privileges on query `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. User `Bob` can still create queries in graph `recommend`, and read, update, drop, install and execute existing queries `query1` and `query2` since he is still granted with role `myRole`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Migrate RBAC WRITE_QUERY privilege for User-Defined roles
The `WRITE_QUERY` privilege in global and graph level scopes for user-defined roles is deprecated in TigerGraph 4.1.

If users were granted user-defined roles with `WRITE_QUERY` privileges before upgrade, the following privileges `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY`, will all be granted to the same role with all existing queries in the same scope. At the same time, `CREATE_QUERY` privilege on the same scope will be granted to the same role in the same scope.

====
.For example:
* User `Bob` was granted with the user-defined role `myRole` with `WRITE_QUERY` in graph `recommend` in TigerGraph 3.10, and there are two queries, `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. After the upgrade to TigerGraph 4.1, role `myRole` will have the `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in graph `recommend`, and `READ_QUERY`, `UPDATE_QUERY`, `DROP_QUERY`, `INSTALL_QUERY`, `EXECUTE_QUERY` privileges on query `query1` and `query2` in graph `recommend`. User `Bob` can still create queries in graph `recommend`, and read, update, drop, install and execute existing queries `query1` and `query2` since he is still granted the role `myRole`.
```

The query ACL readers will be granted `READ` privilege on the same query after upgrade.

[#_migrate_query_acl_executor]
=== Migrate Query ACL Executor
The query ACL executors will be granted `EXECUTE` privilege on the same query after upgrade.

[NOTE]
====
In some cases, query ACL privileges can't be migrated successfully.
Then the owner of queries will become the user who operates the upgrade procedure.

Contact TigerGraph Support if you need help retaining ACL-like privileges after upgrading from version 3.x to 4.x.
====

== Migrate Role-based Access Control(RBAC) Object-Based Query Privileges
Query Object-Based privileges are introduced in TigerGraph 4.1.
`CREATE` privilege on queries will exist only at the global and local graph scope.
Other query privileges, including `READ`, `UPDATE`, `DROP`, `INSTALL`, `EXECUTE` and `OWNERSHIP`, will exist only at the query scope.

All existing Query privileges will be migrated into Query Object-Based privileges during upgrade and be fully backwards-compatible with existing queries.

[#_changes_for_builtin_roles]
=== Changes for Built-in roles
`READ_QUERY` and `WRITE_QUERY` privileges will be removed from all built-in roles.

> The roles held `WRITE_QUERY` privilege before 4.1.0 will hold `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in the same scope since 4.1.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The roles held `WRITE_QUERY` privilege before 4.1 will hold `CREATE_QUERY` privilege in the same scope since 4.1.
```
